<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"
      epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0"
      xml:lang="en-GB">
<head>
    <title>Endnotes</title>
    <link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="backmatter">
<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
    <h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
    <ol>
        <li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
            <p>“Weird Women, translated from the French of Barbey d'Aurévilly. With thirteen engravings. Privately Printed, London.” <a href="chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
        </li>
        <li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
            <p>Night was falling, a dubious night of Autumn; it was the hour when fair ones hanging pensive on our arms said words so specious in whispered tones that since that time our soul is lost in trembling and amaze. <a href="chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
        </li>
        <li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
            <p>For what we still desire is the shade of colour, not the colour, nothing but the shade⁠ ⁠… and all the rest is <em>literature</em>. <a href="chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
        </li>
        <li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
            <p>Obscene confessor of fair bigots stillborn. <a href="chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
        </li>
        <li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
            <p>Eternal feminine of the eternal clown. <a href="chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
        </li>
        <li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
            <p>O mirror! chill water-pool frozen by ennui within thy frame, how many times, and for hours long, tortured by dreams and searching my memories that are like dead leaves under the glassy surface that covers thy depths profound, have I seen myself in these like a far-off shadow! But, horror! of evenings, in thy cruel fountain, have I known the bare nudity of my broken vision! <a href="chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
        </li>
        <li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
            <p>Then shall I awake to the pristine fervour, standing upright and alone under an old-world flood of light, Flower of the lily! and the one of you all for innocence! <a href="chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
        </li>
    </ol>
</section>
</body>
</html>
